===========================
Internationalization (i18n)
===========================

Tet builds on Pyramid's translation machinery and wires it up so that
translation is convenient from both view code and templates. Once i18n is
enabled, every request gains ``request.translate`` and ``request.pluralize``
helpers that know the application's default translation domain, and every
template -- including viewlet fragments -- automatically receives the familiar
``_``, ``gettext``, ``ngettext`` and ``localizer`` globals.

This page explains how to enable i18n, how the request helpers behave, how the
template globals are injected, and how to lay out your translation catalogs.

Enabling i18n
-------------

The i18n support lives in :mod:`tet.i18n`. There are two ways to turn it on.

The recommended way is to list ``"i18n"`` among the features of your
application factory. The application factory derives a sensible default
translation domain (your package name) automatically.

.. code-block:: python

    from tet.config import application_factory


    @application_factory(included_features=["i18n"])
    def main(config):
        config.add_translation_dirs("myapp:locale")
        config.scan()

You can also include the module directly the way you would include any Pyramid
add-on:

.. code-block:: python

    config.include("tet.i18n")

When included this way, the default translation domain is taken from the
``default_i18n_domain`` setting if present, otherwise it falls back to the
configured package name:

.. code-block:: ini

    [app:main]
    use = egg:myapp
    default_i18n_domain = myapp

Choosing the default domain explicitly
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you want full control, call :func:`tet.i18n.configure_i18n` yourself and
pass the domain you want to use:

.. code-block:: python

    from tet.i18n import configure_i18n


    def main(global_config, **settings):
        config = Configurator(settings=settings)
        configure_i18n(config, default_domain="myapp")
        config.add_translation_dirs("myapp:locale")
        # ...

``configure_i18n`` is what actually does the work. It:

- subscribes ``add_renderer_globals`` to both ``pyramid.events.BeforeRender``
  and ``tet.viewlet.IBeforeViewletRender``;
- creates a :class:`pyramid.i18n.TranslationStringFactory` for the default
  domain and stores it on the registry as ``config.registry.tsf``;
- adds the ``request.translate`` and ``request.pluralize`` request methods
  (both reified properties);
- adds a ``request.localize`` reified property bound to
  :func:`pyramid.i18n.get_localizer`.

Translation string factories
-----------------------------

A *translation string factory* turns a plain string into a Pyramid
:class:`~pyramid.i18n.TranslationString` bound to a particular domain. Tet
creates one for your default domain and keeps it on the registry:

.. code-block:: python

    tsf = config.registry.tsf
    msg = tsf("Hello, World!")

You rarely need to touch ``registry.tsf`` directly, because
``request.translate`` and ``request.pluralize`` apply it for you (see below).
You can still create additional factories for other domains in the usual
Pyramid way when you need them:

.. code-block:: python

    from pyramid.i18n import TranslationStringFactory

    _ = TranslationStringFactory("myapp")
    label = _("Save")

Translating in view code
-------------------------

``request.translate`` is a reified property that returns a callable. Calling
it with a string wraps that string in the registry's translation string
factory (so it picks up the default domain) and then translates it with the
request's localizer.

.. code-block:: python

    from pyramid.view import view_config


    @view_config(route_name="hello", renderer="json")
    def hello(request):
        return {"message": request.translate("Hello, World!")}

The callable accepts keyword-only arguments for fine control:

.. code-block:: python

    # Override the domain for a single call
    request.translate("Save", domain="otherapp")

    # Disambiguate with a message context
    request.translate("Open", context="verb")

    # Interpolate placeholders with a mapping
    request.translate(
        "Welcome, %(name)s",
        mapping={"name": user.name},
    )

The full signature of the returned callable is::

    auto_translate(string, *, domain=<default>, mapping=None, context=None)

If you pass a value that is already a ``TranslationString`` (rather than a
plain ``str``), it is translated as-is and the ``context`` argument is ignored
-- the factory is only applied to bare strings.

Pluralization
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``request.pluralize`` works the same way for plural forms. It returns a
callable that selects the singular or plural message based on ``n`` and
translates the result:

.. code-block:: python

    @view_config(route_name="cart", renderer="json")
    def cart(request):
        count = len(request.cart)
        return {
            "summary": request.pluralize(
                "%(num)d item in cart",
                "%(num)d items in cart",
                count,
                mapping={"num": count},
            ),
        }

The full signature is::

    auto_pluralize(singular, plural, n, *, domain=<default>,
                   mapping=None, context=None)

As with ``translate``, the ``context`` argument is applied only when the
``singular`` value is a plain string.

Template globals
----------------

When i18n is configured, Tet injects four globals into every template render
context via the ``add_renderer_globals`` subscriber:

=============== =====================
Global          Bound to
=============== =====================
``_``           ``request.translate``
``gettext``     ``request.translate``
``ngettext``    ``request.pluralize``
``localizer``   ``request.localizer``
=============== =====================

``_`` and ``gettext`` are aliases for the same translate callable, so you can
use whichever reads better in a given template.

Tonnikala templates use ``$`` for interpolation, so calling these globals is
natural:

.. code-block:: html

    <h1>$_("Welcome to our site!")</h1>

    <button>${_("Save")}</button>

When you need to pass a mapping or a context, use braces to delimit the full
expression:

.. code-block:: html

    <p>${_('Welcome, %(name)s', mapping={'name': user.name})}</p>

    <span>${_('Open', context='verb')}</span>

Pluralization in templates uses ``ngettext`` exactly like the request helper:

.. code-block:: html

    <p>${ngettext('%(num)d message',
                  '%(num)d messages',
                  count,
                  mapping={'num': count})}</p>

The ``localizer`` global is the request's Pyramid
:class:`~pyramid.i18n.Localizer`, which is handy for locale-aware formatting
or for inspecting the negotiated locale:

.. code-block:: html

    <html lang="$localizer.locale_name">

Globals in viewlets
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Viewlet fragments are rendered through a separate event,
``tet.viewlet.IBeforeViewletRender``, rather than the normal Pyramid
``BeforeRender``. Because ``configure_i18n`` subscribes ``add_renderer_globals``
to *both* events, the same ``_``, ``gettext``, ``ngettext`` and ``localizer``
globals are available inside viewlet templates with no extra work:

.. code-block:: python

    from tet.viewlet import viewlet


    @viewlet("myapp:templates/sidebar.tk")
    def sidebar(request):
        return {"user": request.user}

.. code-block:: html

    <!-- myapp:templates/sidebar.tk -->
    <aside>
      <h2>$_("Navigation")</h2>
      <p>${_('Signed in as %(name)s', mapping={'name': user.name})}</p>
    </aside>

The subscriber resolves the current request from the event payload, falling
back to :func:`pyramid.threadlocal.get_current_request` when the event does
not carry one, so the globals are populated reliably in both rendering paths.

Setting up translation directories and locales
----------------------------------------------

Translations are loaded from translation directories registered with
:meth:`~pyramid.config.Configurator.add_translation_dirs`. A typical layout
places GNU ``gettext`` catalogs under a ``locale`` directory in your package:

.. code-block:: text

    myapp/
      locale/
        myapp.pot
        fi/
          LC_MESSAGES/
            myapp.mo
            myapp.po
        sv/
          LC_MESSAGES/
            myapp.mo
            myapp.po

Register the directory during configuration. The package name used here should
match your default translation domain so that ``.mo`` files are found:

.. code-block:: python

    config.add_translation_dirs("myapp:locale")

Pyramid negotiates the active locale per request (for example via a locale
negotiator or the ``_LOCALE_`` request parameter); the localizer used by
``request.translate`` and ``request.pluralize`` reflects that negotiated
locale automatically.

Extracting and compiling catalogs follows the standard ``gettext`` workflow.
Extract messages into a ``.pot`` template, create per-locale ``.po`` files, and
compile them to ``.mo``. For example, with ``Babel``:

.. code-block:: console

    $ pybabel extract -o myapp/locale/myapp.pot myapp
    $ pybabel init -D myapp -i myapp/locale/myapp.pot \
        -d myapp/locale -l fi
    $ pybabel compile -D myapp -d myapp/locale

Because ``request.translate`` wraps bare strings with the default-domain
factory, the message ids you write in code and templates (``"Hello, World!"``,
``"Save"``, ...) are exactly the strings the extractor should pick up. Make
sure your extraction configuration scans both your Python modules and your
Tonnikala templates.

See also
--------

- :doc:`configuration` -- the application factory, features, and settings
  such as ``default_i18n_domain``.
- :doc:`templating` -- the Tonnikala renderer and ``$`` interpolation syntax.
- :doc:`viewlets` -- reusable template fragments and the
  ``IBeforeViewletRender`` event.
