======================
SQLAlchemy Integration
======================

Tet provides enhanced SQLAlchemy integration with a custom traversal root
factory, a simple session/transaction setup keyed on the ``pyramid_di``
service registry, and a password-hashing mixin for user models.

These features target Tet 0.5.0 and Python 3.8+.

Root Factories
==============

Tet's ``SQLARootFactory`` provides a robust foundation for traversal-based
applications by turning common SQLAlchemy lookup failures into ``KeyError``.

Basic Root Factory
------------------

``SQLARootFactory`` is a base class whose ``__getitem__`` delegates to a
``supplier`` method that you implement. The constructor takes the current
request, which is stored as ``self.request``:

.. code-block:: python

    from sqlalchemy.orm import Session
    from tet.sqlalchemy.factory import SQLARootFactory

    class UserFactory(SQLARootFactory):
        def supplier(self, item):
            """Override this method to provide object lookup logic."""
            session = self.request.find_service(Session)
            return session.query(User).filter(User.id == int(item)).one()

When ``supplier`` raises ``MultipleResultsFound``, ``NoResultFound``, or
``DataError``, ``SQLARootFactory.__getitem__`` re-raises it as
``KeyError(item)`` (with the original exception chained via ``from``). You do
not need to catch these exceptions yourself.

Using the Root Factory
----------------------

Register your factory with a route (or as the global root factory):

.. code-block:: python

    from pyramid.config import Configurator

    def main():
        with Configurator() as config:
            # As a per-route factory
            config.add_route('user', '/users/{id}', factory=UserFactory)

            # Or as the global traversal root factory
            config.set_root_factory(UserFactory)

            return config.make_wsgi_app()

Exception Handling
------------------

``SQLARootFactory`` automatically converts these SQLAlchemy exceptions to
``KeyError``:

* ``sqlalchemy.orm.exc.NoResultFound``: when a query returns no results
* ``sqlalchemy.orm.exc.MultipleResultsFound``: when ``one()`` finds multiple
  rows
* ``sqlalchemy.exc.DataError``: when there is a data-related SQL error (for
  example an invalid value passed to the database)

Because Pyramid traversal treats ``KeyError`` as "not found", this conversion
yields a clean HTTP 404 response instead of exposing a SQL error to the user.

Advanced Root Factory Example
-----------------------------

A more sophisticated factory dispatching on the key shape. Note that you only
need to handle exceptions that are *not* already mapped (for example
``ValueError`` from ``int()``); the SQLAlchemy lookup exceptions are mapped for
you:

.. code-block:: python

    import re

    from sqlalchemy.orm import Session
    from tet.sqlalchemy.factory import SQLARootFactory

    class ApplicationRoot(SQLARootFactory):
        def supplier(self, item):
            session = self.request.find_service(Session)

            if re.fullmatch(r'\d+', item):
                # Numeric primary key
                return session.query(MyModel).filter_by(id=int(item)).one()

            if re.fullmatch(r'[a-f0-9-]{36}', item):
                # UUID
                return session.query(MyModel).filter_by(uuid=item).one()

            # Fall back to slug lookup
            return session.query(MyModel).filter_by(slug=item).one()

Session Management
==================

Tet provides session and transaction management through the
``tet.sqlalchemy.simple`` module.

Tet's SQLAlchemy Simple Integration
-----------------------------------

Including ``tet.sqlalchemy.simple`` adds a ``setup_sqlalchemy`` directive and
wires up dependency injection and transaction management. The ``includeme``
performs an availability check for ``sqlalchemy`` (raising ``RuntimeError`` if
it cannot be imported), includes ``pyramid_di`` and ``pyramid_tm``, and sets
``tm.manager_hook`` to ``pyramid_tm.explicit_manager``:

.. code-block:: python

    from tet.config import application_factory, ALL_FEATURES
    from tet.sqlalchemy.simple import declarative_base

    # Create models using Tet's declarative base (Alembic-friendly naming)
    Base = declarative_base()

    @application_factory(included_features=ALL_FEATURES)
    def main(config):
        # Adds the setup_sqlalchemy directive and includes
        # pyramid_di and pyramid_tm
        config.include('tet.sqlalchemy.simple')

        # Build the engine from settings (sqlalchemy.* by default) and
        # register the request-scoped session service
        config.setup_sqlalchemy()

        config.scan()

``declarative_base()`` accepts optional keyword-only ``metadata`` and
``naming_convention`` arguments; by default it applies an Alembic-friendly
``DEFAULT_NAMING_CONVENTION`` so autogenerated constraint names are stable
across database backends.

The ``setup_sqlalchemy`` Directive
----------------------------------

``setup_sqlalchemy`` is registered as a configurator directive. Its
keyword-only parameters are:

``settings``
  Optional settings dictionary used to build the engine. If omitted, the
  registry settings are used. Mutually exclusive with ``engine``.

``prefix``
  Settings key prefix passed to ``engine_from_config`` (default
  ``"sqlalchemy."``).

``engine``
  An existing SQLAlchemy ``Engine`` to bind the session factory to. Mutually
  exclusive with ``settings``; supplying both raises ``ValueError``.

``name``
  An optional alternate name under which to register the session service
  (useful for binding more than one database). Defaults to ``""``.

Internally ``setup_sqlalchemy``:

* builds (or accepts) the engine and configures a ``sessionmaker`` bound to it;
* registers a request-scoped service factory for the ``sqlalchemy.orm.Session``
  type (via ``config.register_service_factory``), which returns a transaction-
  managed session built with ``get_tm_session(session_factory, request.tm)``;
* registers a ``scoped_session`` under the name
  ``"scoped_session"`` (or ``"scoped_session:<name>"`` when ``name`` is given);
* defers ``sqlalchemy.orm.configure_mappers`` via a config action.

Call ``setup_sqlalchemy`` *after* importing all of your model modules so the
mappers are fully populated.

Transaction-managed Sessions
----------------------------

``get_tm_session(session_factory, transaction_manager)`` creates a session and
hooks it to a transaction manager. It imports ``zope.sqlalchemy`` lazily (so
the dependency is only required when this function actually runs) and calls
``zope.sqlalchemy.register(dbsession, transaction_manager=...)``.

Inside a request, ``setup_sqlalchemy`` passes ``request.tm`` (provided by
``pyramid_tm``) as the transaction manager, so commits and rollbacks are tied
to the request lifecycle automatically.

In scripts, where there is no ``pyramid_tm`` request, wrap the session in a
transaction manager yourself:

.. code-block:: python

    import transaction
    from tet.sqlalchemy.simple import get_tm_session

    with transaction.manager:
        dbsession = get_tm_session(session_factory, transaction.manager)
        # ... use dbsession ...

Using Sessions in Views
-----------------------

The session is registered as a ``pyramid_di`` service keyed on the
``sqlalchemy.orm.Session`` type. Retrieve it with ``request.find_service``:

.. code-block:: python

    from pyramid.view import view_config
    from sqlalchemy.orm import Session

    @view_config(route_name='items', renderer='json')
    def list_items(request):
        session = request.find_service(Session)
        items = session.query(MyModel).all()
        return {'items': items}

Because the service is registered with ``pyramid_di``, it can also be injected
into a service or view class via ``autowired``:

.. code-block:: python

    from pyramid_di import autowired
    from sqlalchemy.orm import Session

    class ItemViews:
        # Resolved from the request-scoped Session service
        session: Session = autowired(Session)

        def __init__(self, request):
            self.request = request

        @view_config(route_name='items', renderer='json')
        def list_items(self):
            items = self.session.query(MyModel).all()
            return {'items': items}

If you registered a named database (``setup_sqlalchemy(name="reports")``), pass
the same name when resolving: ``request.find_service(Session, name="reports")``.

Automatic Features
------------------

When you include ``tet.sqlalchemy.simple`` and call
``config.setup_sqlalchemy()``, you get:

**Dependency Injection (pyramid_di)**
  The session is registered as a request-scoped service keyed on the
  ``Session`` type, resolvable via ``find_service`` or ``autowired``.

**Transaction Management (pyramid_tm)**
  ``pyramid_tm`` is included and configured with the
  ``pyramid_tm.explicit_manager`` hook. The session is joined to
  ``request.tm`` via ``zope.sqlalchemy``, so the transaction is committed on a
  successful response and aborted when an exception propagates -- no manual
  commit or rollback needed.

Password Hashing
================

``tet.sqlalchemy.password`` provides ``UserPasswordMixin``, a mixin for user
models that stores a hashed password and verifies plaintext against it. It
delegates hashing and verification to ``tet.util.crypt`` (``crypt`` and
``verify``).

The mixin defines a ``_password`` column (named ``password`` in the database,
typed ``sqlalchemy.Unicode``, nullable) and exposes it through a ``password``
synonym property: assigning to ``password`` hashes the value, and reading it
returns the stored hash.

.. code-block:: python

    from sqlalchemy import Column, Integer, String
    from tet.sqlalchemy.simple import declarative_base
    from tet.sqlalchemy.password import UserPasswordMixin

    Base = declarative_base()

    class User(UserPasswordMixin, Base):
        __tablename__ = 'users'

        id = Column(Integer, primary_key=True)
        username = Column(String(100), unique=True, nullable=False)

Using the mixin:

.. code-block:: python

    user = User(username='john')
    user.password = 'secret123'        # hashed automatically on assignment

    user.password                      # -> the stored hash, not the plaintext

    if user.validate_password('secret123'):
        print('Password correct!')

``validate_password(password)`` returns ``False`` when no password has been set
(the stored hash is ``None``), and otherwise returns the result of
``tet.util.crypt.verify``.

Model Serialization
===================

Tet's JSON renderer can serialize SQLAlchemy model objects. See the JSON
renderer documentation for full details; the patterns below summarize the two
common approaches.

Custom ``__json__`` Method
--------------------------

.. code-block:: python

    from sqlalchemy import Column, Integer, String, DateTime
    from tet.sqlalchemy.simple import declarative_base

    Base = declarative_base()

    class User(Base):
        __tablename__ = 'users'

        id = Column(Integer, primary_key=True)
        name = Column(String(50))
        email = Column(String(100))
        created = Column(DateTime)

        def __json__(self, request):
            return {
                'id': self.id,
                'name': self.name,
                'email': self.email,
                'created': self.created,  # datetime handled by Tet's renderer
            }

JSON Adapter
------------

.. code-block:: python

    from pyramid.config import Configurator

    def user_adapter(user, request):
        return {
            'id': user.id,
            'name': user.name,
            'email': user.email,
            'created': user.created,
        }

    def main():
        with Configurator() as config:
            config.include('tet.renderers.json')
            config.add_json_adapter(for_=User, adapter=user_adapter)

            return config.make_wsgi_app()

Query Result Handling
---------------------

Tet's JSON renderer also handles SQLAlchemy keyed-tuple query results, so
column-projection queries can be returned directly:

.. code-block:: python

    from pyramid.view import view_config
    from sqlalchemy.orm import Session

    @view_config(route_name='user_summary', renderer='json')
    def user_summary(request):
        session = request.find_service(Session)
        results = session.query(User.name, User.email).all()
        return {'users': results}

Testing with Databases
======================

Testing Patterns
----------------

Use pytest fixtures for database testing. Per project conventions, prefer a
real PostgreSQL database (required for JSONB and other PostgreSQL-specific
types) over SQLite:

.. code-block:: python

    import pytest
    from sqlalchemy import create_engine
    from sqlalchemy.orm import sessionmaker
    from myapp.models import Base

    @pytest.fixture(scope='session')
    def engine():
        return create_engine('postgresql+psycopg://user:pass@localhost/test')

    @pytest.fixture(scope='session')
    def tables(engine):
        Base.metadata.create_all(engine)
        yield
        Base.metadata.drop_all(engine)

    @pytest.fixture
    def dbsession(engine, tables):
        Session = sessionmaker(bind=engine)
        session = Session()
        yield session
        session.rollback()
        session.close()

Testing Root Factories
----------------------

Because the factory resolves its session via ``request.find_service(Session)``,
mock ``find_service`` accordingly:

.. code-block:: python

    import pytest
    from unittest.mock import Mock
    from sqlalchemy.orm import Session

    from myapp.models import MyModel
    from myapp.root import MyRootFactory

    def test_root_factory_success(dbsession):
        obj = MyModel(name='test')
        dbsession.add(obj)
        dbsession.commit()

        request = Mock()
        request.find_service.return_value = dbsession

        root = MyRootFactory(request)
        assert root[str(obj.id)] == obj

    def test_root_factory_not_found(dbsession):
        request = Mock()
        request.find_service.return_value = dbsession

        root = MyRootFactory(request)
        with pytest.raises(KeyError):
            root['999999']

Best Practices
==============

**Use the Registered Session Service**
  Resolve the session via ``request.find_service(Session)`` (or ``autowired``)
  rather than creating ad-hoc sessions, so it participates in the request
  transaction.

**Let the Factory Map Exceptions**
  Use ``SQLARootFactory`` and let it convert ``NoResultFound``,
  ``MultipleResultsFound``, and ``DataError`` into ``KeyError`` / 404.

**Implement Custom Serialization**
  Use ``__json__`` methods or JSON adapters for model serialization.

**Rely on pyramid_tm**
  Let ``pyramid_tm`` and ``zope.sqlalchemy`` manage commit/rollback; avoid
  manual transaction control inside views.

**Test Database Code**
  Use database fixtures with rollbacks; use PostgreSQL where the application
  depends on PostgreSQL-specific types.

Security Considerations
=======================

**Parameterized Queries**
  The SQLAlchemy ORM uses parameterized queries, preventing SQL injection.

**Input Validation**
  Validate input before using it in queries; the factory's ``DataError``
  mapping is a safety net, not a substitute for validation.

**Sensitive Data**
  Never serialize the ``password`` hash (or other secrets) into JSON output.

**Database Permissions and Transport**
  Use least-privilege database users and SSL/TLS connections in production.
